Thank you very much, Bob.
I know you're too insistent on you, Bob, but I have to say I am humble in your presence.
No, no, no, no.
Listen, I'm like you.
I'm just trying to put some words out of my age.
You've done so much.
You know, I've lived longer than Walker did.
Walker died, I think he, well, he died, I think he was around 70.
Wasn't he?
Don't forget, he'd been sick, of course.
He looked 70, too.
I mean, he was an old 70.
My father died last year at 91, and he was a young 91, you know.
And that's his Jaguar out there.
I just got it, you know.
It was 1971, and when he died, it became mine, but not until it was.
You know, I want to tell you something about Walker.
He died out in William.
metastasized.
He had gone for a checkup, and they told him everything was fine.
That's terrible.
He called me up afterwards.
He said, they missed it.
That's the way he started the thing.
I said, who is that?
What's going on here?
And then he went on to explain.
For a guy who had that whole religious and existentialist, I was surprised at how tough, well, why should I be?
But he went to the Mayo Clinic.
I mean, he tried.
But he'd been through that, of course, with TV.
I mean, and he had done the same kind of perseverance and demonstrated the same level of courage, I think.
Yeah.
And he fought.
I went to see him at the end to say goodbye, really.
I flew down there.
It's horrible.
He was closest then to an African-American woman who was taking care of him.
It's a southern story.
Of course, Buck was there and his children, but she, in that bedroom, took care of him.
Anyway, he was...
Wait a minute, let's see if I can get it right.
I think he was born in 1916, and he died in 1989, somehow that's 1620.
Yeah, he was a little over seven years.
Since we began with Walker Percy, I mean, I certainly have Walker Percy, William Carlos,
Williams, Flannery, O'Connor.
What are those three names?
I mean, when I say those three names, what's the association of thoughts?
Thoughts are the only one they're aware.
I had a note from William Collins Williams just before he died when his wife, Arcee, told him what I was hoping to do.
Because, you know, he died in 1963.
And I was just getting started in that whole civil rights work.
And he told her, you know, he nodded and he said, that's good.
She later told him, you know, he'd had a stroke.
I wouldn't be sitting and talking to you if I hadn't been for him.
It's an extraordinary story.
And I know it's been told a number of times, but you talk about
I told you what he sent me back on the prescription?
No, I told you that.
I got—Perry Miller got me to send my thesis, my essay to him, which I was— Now, this is your senior thesis, right?
Yeah, and I said, I can't do that.
And Miller said to me, you don't have enough money for the poster.
So I'm sad.
I just can't bother him.
He said, did it ever occur to you that he might be interested and want to have an undergraduate?
He has no use for this place, and you should pay attention to his dislike.
You could at least send him that.
Anyway, I sent it to him, and I got back.
William C. Williams, MD, 9 Ridge Road, Rutherford, New Jersey.
Dear Mr. Coles,
Thank you for your writing about me.
Dash.
Not bad for a Harvard student.
That's wonderful.
This has kind of shaped so much of your own outlook, hasn't it?
I mean, what I read about, you don't have a disdain for this whole horror of the ivory tower intellectual elite here, but it does amuse you.
And I wonder if this kind of, if not disdain, this
I don't know if I'm choosing the right word, but I wonder if it begins with Williamson, the influence that he may have had on him.
Well, it's because of him that I took pre-med courses and went to medical school.
And I really wanted to be a doctor, per se, right?
I had no intention of becoming a physician, but I learned for him.
My ambition in high school and college
was in some way to teach English.
My favorite teachers in high school were the teachers of English.
My father came from England, and my father was from Yorkshire, and my father and mother used to read to one another.
That's how I got into all of this.
If you want the psychoanalytic back.
Which you're qualified to offer, I think.
I got into it.
I got into this.
remembering them reading to one another.
My father would read from Dickens, especially, which he loved.
Oh, he loved.
And he'd read from Hardy.
Read aloud?
Yeah.
To your mother?
To the obscurity.
Read aloud, then she'd read aloud.
And you and your wife did the same thing.
What?
You and your wife did the same thing.
Yes.
My wife was a high school English teacher.
And my brother, by the way, became an English professor of English at the University of Michigan.
So this is in the family.
But I mean, this reading aloud.
This book I'm working on has its working title, Every Book is Reader.
And it's a long, discressive look into the continuing power of books.
I mean, everybody's got a reading book, but this is mine.
At the core of what I'm doing are a few of the great thinkers that I admire most.
in the world.
You've been one of them talking a little bit, not only about the power of reading, the power of storytelling, the power of narrative, and how it has really driven you to become the person that you are and to accomplish the things that you have.
No.
That's my opening statement.
No, listen, I'm with you, and the more that you do, the better.
You know, we need to know, Mrs. Look, as to draw and walk up.
We're the creature of language, and through language we affirm ourselves and find out about the world, including ourselves, the words, and we share with one another through language.
When you began to really learn about Walker and Dr. Williams and Flannery O'Connor, did it help you to know what they had read?
We talked about how reading energizes a life.
Did you learn anything about their reading?
About who?
Their reading, the people who you were writing about.
Oh, yes.
Learning about.
Well, Walker, who, of course, turned to Dostoevsky and Tolstoy and the whole range of literature, English, American, Russian.
Flora O'Connor I learned about, partially from her letters, but I spoke with her mother at great length.
and went down there to Milledgeville and talked with her.
Of course, she had died.
I never met her.
But her mother, when she heard that I came from Concord, Robert Fitzgerald had written her a note, which is how I got to see her.
And I'll never forget, she said, if you're from Concord, I hope you know half of one.
I said, yes.
I told her I lived in it.
She said,
Flannery had no great interest.
She was tactful.
She had no great interest in Emerson and Thoreau.
It was Hawthorne.
So I thought to myself, of course, you know.
Well, of course, how did you come to that?
Why the of course?
But then the story, as she said, she thought that they were like a lot of people today, as far as she would go.
You mean the Hawthorne characters?
No, the Emerson.
Oh, the Emerson.
Oh, okay, yeah.
Of course, she didn't dare say to me, the liberal do-gooder.
But Hawthorne was okay?
Hawthorne, yes, because he was more...
religious and conservative and skeptical about contemporary life then in the 19th century, less hopefully man-centered or secular or whatever it is.
When you say that Walker all of a sudden embraced all of these panoply of writing, was it an epiphany for him?
For Walker?
That's a good question.
I think it was his interest in reading, which preceded his writing, his sense of tragedy, which he'd experienced, after all, father, a suicide, mother in an accident that took an orphan, really, is what he became, all too young for this.
And I think through novels he found kindred spirits, those who would, the writing, the writers who could conjure up this world helped him to understand his own world and also made him feel less lonely.
Because, you know, when you read, you are in the company of another person.
The other person's words and thoughts become part of yours.
and connect with you.
And reading, in my opinion, is a kind of human connection.
It's an embrace of another person's words, thoughts, ideas, suggestions, premises, worries, concerns, the whole list of nouns is what I think
reading enables and prompts in a person. Is this something that you had mentioned the first time we spoke? I mean I can't believe it's seven years ago. The time does fly. That what you learned from your mother and I believe also from your father was that was that this cup this idea of taking hold of stories that you could live your life by and and I wonder uh we really didn't pursue that much further than than that observation if it's been really eighteen, estimated?
Well, I did.
You know, my father went to MIT, and he was a scientist.
Buddy was a scientist who had gone to school in England and who was familiar with the English novelists and essayists.
My mother came from the Midwest, and her father, well her family, they were farmers and then had become storekeepers or whatever, but she came from Sioux City, Iowa.
to Boston, as my father came to Boston from Yorkshire.
But my mother had read because she liked to go to the library to read.
And in fact, I have an early memory that's interesting.
My mother always encouraged me to go to the library and my brother.
And one day, I went to the Milton Library.
No, it was actually the Mattapan Branch Library over the
extension of Boston and Borders of Milton.
I still remember it.
I went to the library, and the library was quite gall, was divided into three parts.
There was the children's room, the high school's room, and the adult room.
I used to wander in those various rooms.
And one day, the librarian, whose name I still remember, Pauline O'Meara,
M-E-A-R-A, O-M-E-A-R-A.
Oh, possibly, M-E-A-R-A.
Now, at my age, I remember a librarian I knew when I was seven or eight years old, but she came up to me and told me that I should not be in the adult room, I should be in the children's room.
I went home and told my mother this.
Within a day or two, my mother went with me to the library, and I can still see that conversation, if not confrontation.
And my mother told the librarian that she would like me to go into any of the rooms that I chose to and read any of the books.
And the librarian then told her that I couldn't read all these books or take any of them out because I wasn't old enough.
And my mother said, if you're going to do this, I'm going to come here with him and sit in the adult room and wait for him to choose whatever books you'd like to take home, and I won't take them home on my card.
I still remember that.
I remember the librarian nodding, and I remember, I will say, this feeling of triumph, that I could now go any place I wanted in that library, including, I used to go into the adult room and read the newspapers.
They were on these old-fashioned polls, right, that you could be hearing.
Like they said at the YMCA, these old polls.
And I was turning the pages and
And it was as if I'd been given permission, first by my parents of course, and then by the whole world
to read and read and read.
And did you exercise the privilege?
I did, and I took some, they let me take whatever books I want.
Do you remember some of the books, the previously forbidden books that you now want?
Well, I remember the books of William L. Shira, of all things.
Now, you might say, what is a seven or eight year, but they thought it's seven or eight, I guess I shouldn't be reading.
Well, I can't understand, yeah.
I remember William L. Shira and his inside, inside, inside books.
And he was in print already?
And John Gunther was another.
John Gunther, of course, yeah.
And Halliburton, I think, was more, they thought, was more for young adults rather than children.
But I was a great fan of Richard Halliburton.
But you were focusing on non-fiction.
Yes, I was focusing on non-fiction.
So at what point...
Does the storytelling, the fiction, enter into a call of stories, to be a point of phrase?
At home, I heard the fiction at home in the sense that my parents would read novels to one another or excerpts.
I still recall my mother and father contemplating Jude Fawley in Jude the Obscure.
And I remember my mother saying to me, this was a young man who had all kinds of abilities, but who was being brushed aside because he was from the poor.
Now, this is prophetic, given the work I played to do.
But I remember this, and I remember Jude, and of course I ended up teaching Jude the Obscure to college students.
and lecturing from the novel, but also out of the remembrance of my own experience with my parents and with myself as a boy, now a teenager, older, and definitely reading Jude the Obscure.
Then I remember my father introducing me to George Eliot and Middlemarsh.
That's a tough book.
I was in high school.
It was, as I told them,
too long.
Just as I thought War and Peace was too long, and the Brothers Karamazov too long, I even told Walker Percy that once.
I said, you know, I was going through a lot of work in those books.
But my parents were willing to do it.
They knew how to excerpt.
And when they got to a paragraph or a sentence that meant something, this gets me even now choked up, they'd read it again.
So that they would together savor the message.
Wonderful.
And this is what I find myself doing now.
I'll stumble into something even in the newspaper or in a magazine, and I just keep going back to it.
Do you read it aloud?
No, I don't.
I read it just to myself.
See, my wife and I used to do this with one another.
She was a high school English teacher, as you know, and as I've said, and we used to read around, but then she died, and so I read to myself.
But I do read.
I did read to my children, and now I read to my grandchildren, and I sit with them and read, and they listen, and when their heads nod for me, I'm in heaven.
When I have a child beside me, nodding, who has gotten a certain message that I am conveying as an intermediary from the writer of a book, even if it's a children's book like Rental,
Lentil is a children's book, but it's also a story about something that happens.
The boy from Alto, Ohio, what happens to him.
And when I see my grandson nodding, I say, this is an affirmation of our humanity.
His, mine, all of our humanity.
Was it your work with children or this lifelong passion for reading?
I'm just wondering at what point you begin to formulate this
this concept of how important narrative and storytelling is to teach medical students and physicians and helping them become better doctors, better human beings.
I wonder what comes first and how that develops?
Well, you know, when I was a medical student,
I used to bring books with me to the anatomy lab because I couldn't take some of the science without some modification, so I'd bring a book of poems to anatomy or histology or physiology, and I figure if I could just take a minute off and look at a poem, that'll help me get through these labs, not being a very good either pre-med or med student in the formal academic sense.
But even there in medical school, I remember one or two teachers who had a certain interest in not only conveying knowledge or factuality, but wanted to tell stories, stories that some of their patients had told them about themselves.
I particularly remember Yale Neyland, who was a professor of medicine.
In fact, I've written about him.
I wrote a piece about him, I think, in the American Poetry Review about...
about 20 years ago, but he stands out because of his storytelling ability as a lecturer and a teacher and a physician.
And then, of course, across the Hudson River when I was in medical school was Dr. Williams, dying, but nevertheless, Patterson was there, Rutherford was there, all New Jersey that he had showed me.
And I could remember that, and I had Patterson close to me, and I would read
a line, another line, and somehow it was like nourishment.
It was like taking vitamin pills and therefore being able to be a bit stronger.
So your life clearly takes a totally different turn if it's not for Dr. Williams.
A totally different turn if it's not for William Carlos Williams.
Oh, there's no question.
I think if it hadn't been for Williams, well, not a totally different turn.
You'd have been teaching English.
I would have been an English teacher.
I was asked what I would hope to be when I was a senior in high school, Boston Latin School, after six years of Latin and three years of Greek, not to mention France.
I mean, a classical education that prepared me to go to college.
But I remember at that time saying to people,
that I liked to be a high school English teacher, and I even now can remember my high school English teachers, much more so than all the other teachers.
I remember reading Dickens at their behest.
I remember reading some poems.
I remember being introduced to Emily Dickinson by one of them.
I mean, these were important people in my thinking-wise, and then, of course,
In my college life, I was taking English literature courses and got very close to Perry Miller, who was the great historian as well as teacher of literature and who changed my life by enabling me to work on Williams when that was a controversial act within the English department at that time.
Believe me, he wasn't taught.
This is Harvard in the 1940s and 50s.
They probably didn't teach any living poets at that point.
That they taught him, you can be sure.
But that's right.
So somebody had the courage then at Harvard to encourage you to say, you know, Bob, this is maybe something.
Courage on his part to encourage me.
Miller's courage, the encouragement of a student.
And then my decision that if I felt so impressed by, enamored of Dr. Williams' way of dealing with life, I decided I should try to go to medical school.
So I took these, hurriedly, these pre-med courses.
And I still remember the interview at Columbia's College of Physicians and Surgeons.
I was interviewed, this is a story in itself, I was interviewed by a biochemist there who asked me questions, and then he said, why would you want to come to this medical school?
I said, well, it's in New York City.
I can cross the Hudson if Dr. Williams continues to live and say hello, or even if he dies, I'll be near where he lived.
And I remember he wrote down, near where he lived.
I still remember that.
And he smiled at me.
He said,
I'm going to tell the committee that they should take a chance of you.
Well, again, this is a moment of perception on the part of the person.
This is the kind of guy we should have, you know, because you don't want everybody stamped out of the same mold.
Whatever.
That's what I knew I was accepted, which was a bit of a miracle, given the fact that I was not exactly the promising Nobel scientist that they all were.
I have to believe that you are one of the
their most distinguished alums, and they're so proud of it.
Well, I mean, these are honors and stuff like that.
But that's a way to develop it.
But I mean, in terms of what you, the way you directed, the way you directed your work.
You know, I've read a number of essays and interviews with you and reviews and our own conversations.
The word character, your use of the word character, it's a motif, it seems, through everything.
There's my mother talking.
There's my mother talking with her interest in spiritual matters and religion and prayer and the lessons that she would give us about behavior and that good is so important and that, in fact, she knew to tell us what Emerson, quoting from Emerson, that character is higher than intellect.
The character, and I for years have quoted that from Emerson in my lectures, that character is higher than, to tell a group of Harvard students, including oneself as a Harvard student, the character is higher than intellect, is I think a bit of a statement.
Well, in one long interview I saw with you, you reminded your questioner that, remember, that Dr. Goebbels had a PhD in comparative literature.
That's right.
You know, I got that from Perry Miller.
Perry Miller used to remind us of those matters.
The gerbils had the PhD, that's right.
And he also went further.
He reminded us that in Germany in 1933 and before, when Hitler took over, that Germany had the highest per capita ratio of high school
and college graduates.
It was the best educated nation in the world.
It also had very high church-going attendance, both among the Lutherans and, of course, the Catholics.
And Mill would say, next time someone tells you that the world is going to be better because of education and prayer, you point to Germany.
Really.
I mentioned that once to Elie Wiesel, and he said it goes beyond Goebbels.
He said you'd be amazed at how many senior officers in the SS
You know, colonels and whatever it was who had PhDs.
That's right.
I mean, it goes well beyond Goebbels.
I mean, you had the whole officer corps, the senior officer corps.
That's right.
And easily the most evil police unit ever in general.
Locked together.
Exquisitely well-educated and beautifully read.
But then...
The element of character, I guess, comes into play.
By the way, I've taught Elie Wiesel for years.
I teach it.
In my course, we'd read Night, Elie Wiesel's Night, and we'd read Dorothy Day's
and the students used to nickname that whole part of the course Night and Day.
Night and Day.
Is this in Guilt 105, too?
Yes, it's called Night and Day in Guilt 105.
I love Eliot.
I know Eliot.
He's wonderful.
What a gift.
He's a gift to us, as Anne Frank was, because out of that horror they could tell stories.
That's what the two of them did.
They somehow redeemed the horror of Nazi hell.
in a storytelling manner that we all remember.
That we all remember.
And reminds us, it actually goes beyond remembering, doesn't it?
That's right, beyond contemplation and reflection.
And they are witnesses through a diary, through a novel.
They are witnesses to help as it visited us.
And I always like, on the flip side of Dr. Goebbels,
having a Ph.D., that Abraham Lincoln never went beyond the second grade.
That's right.
Easily, easily one of our very best-read presidents, certainly one of our greatest thinking presidents, and read Latin, and he was wonderful.
Well, there's a good one.
I should remember, because it's a very important one.
Interesting, isn't it?
But character, I mean, what president had more character than
And also was a storyteller.
I mean, on his day, they loved the fact that he told stories.
And then you wonder whether this kind of person who Lincoln was these days could survive the way we are.
The newspaper stories, the criticism, the savagery of daily life, so to speak, as it is.
enacted in our journals and newspapers.
On a daily basis.
Not to mention television and whatever else.
I mean, you wonder what a privilege it was in those times not to have all this kind of stuff available.
On the one hand, you encourage your students, and you've taught in a law school, the medical school, the business school, throughout the university.
Yes.
And you really impress upon the students the value of
narrative of storytelling.
That's on the one.
That's important.
But then on number two, I wonder, in your work with children and with the impoverished people who perhaps can't read, adults, yet you still learn from the... you learn from these people, don't you, these children?
By the way, I wrote some children's books, which you probably know of, and the reason I did that is because the children told me I should.
The idea for the first book that I did, which was Dead End School,
and which Norman Rockwell illustrated because he was close to Eric Erickson.
They lived next door in Starkbridge, and I was working on that book, and Eric said, Norman should read that, and he should illustrate it.
I said, Eric, I don't even know the person you called Norman.
The next thing I knew...
I got a letter from, quote, Norman.
But I took the main... I was working on this book about what happens to children in ghetto life.
In a city, you are having a rough time and going to school.
And in this case, being bust in Boston, not to mention what I'd seen in the South.
And one of the children said to me, why don't you tell people what you're asking us to tell you.
I looked at her.
I said, well, how could I do that?
She said, well, you're always getting me to tell you what's going on.
And, of course, I had the tape, of course.
You want to know what I did with it and who listened to it?
If anyone else did, did my wife listen to it?
Yes.
I mean, she was being, in her own way, a shrewd investigative reporter.
About how old would you say this traveler?
She was nine years old.
She was an elementary school guest.
I sat down and tried to pay attention to her, which is how I started writing stories about children, for children, based on experiences I've had with children, prompted in this case by a child to connect in a way my writing life about children
to a storytelling mode for children, which is, she didn't put it the way I just did, but she got the point across.
She certainly occasioned the writing of this, I mean, you took affirmative action and direct action.
You sat down and you decided this moved you powerfully enough to... Well, she, you know, several of the kids, first of all, the stories and the involvement with them, but there, at times, you know,
they spoke with me and to me, but they, I felt at times they were speaking for the world.
Remember, I was an older white man who was a doctor.
They knew that I was a person of some means and privilege and background, and for them the opportunity to sit with this guy who
came for some fancy college and, you know, had this background was an opportunity.
But I didn't appreciate that the way they did.
I'm embarrassed even to convey that because I felt that I was learning from them, but they felt in a way that there was a responsibility for me to take what I had learned and to offer it to others.
They didn't put it the way I'm putting it.
But they put it that way.
They knew.
Certainly the way you understood it.
It's clearly the way you understood it.
Yeah, that's right.
But they, you know, I remember the first kid I worked with there, Ruby Bridges, who's, you know, figures and all.
And I worked with a little girl who went through a mob.
And I observed on my way to a medical meeting in New Orleans in 1960,
But I remember her telling me at one point that she hoped that I would let it, she put it that way too, she said, I hope you let some other people know what's going on here.
So I said, well, Ruby, that's my job, ultimately.
That's a story too, you know, the accident, because I never went south to do this work.
I was drafted into the Air Force and put in an Air Force base.
Exactly.
I think you'd say, you can summarize my whole damn life.
It's a series of accidents and incidents.
Coincidental things.
That's right.
That somehow... Now, Erickson did say to me, Erick Erickson once said to me, he said, listen, Bob, I'm listening to you telling me about all these accidents.
He said, but you know, I'll never forget.
He said, you know, it does take two to tango.
And I looked at it.
He said, some of us...
are only looking for these accidents, and some of us don't pay any attention to them.
And if you're going to pay attention to them, you at least ought to give yourself a little bit of a break and say that you were ready to respond to those accidents.
I said, all right, Eric, do you want to say that?
I responded to them, but I didn't seek them out.
They popped right in front of me, and he said, luck.
Luck is important in life, which George Eliot tells us.
Chance.
Luck, chance, circumstance.
Fantastic.
She says that, I think, in Middlemarch.
Chance, luck, circumstance.
The James Agee professor.
What?
You had been the Agee professor.
How appropriate is that?
I mean, is this something that you selected for yourself?
That's a Harvard story, because, you know, they felt that I should have
a professorship.
Then they thought that I should have a named professorship in the usual ways, through departments or through a philanthropist.
And they finally decided that—they asked me, who would you want this professorship to be named after?
This was with Neil Rudenstein, who was president.
And I said, well, I think William Collins Williams, after all, I studied him when I was a student here.
And this is the whole story of my working life.
It's based on the kind of home visiting work that he did.
He didn't only sit in an office.
He went out there into those communities, up and down those tenement house stairs to visit families.
President Rubenstein smiled and nodded.
He said, I have to talk this over.
Then he called me in again.
He said, Bob, we can't name a professorship after Dr. Williams.
What?
He had no connection with Harvard.
The money's going to come out of the Harvard funds.
He said, if there were an endowed professorship for philanthropists,
He said, even then, there might be a problem, given the way professorships are named.
It ain't have to be endowing family, or a department goes through a routine.
And you have to justify this in terms of the intellectuals.
Art is an F.O.
Matheson theorist, which there must be.
I'm sure there must be.
I don't know whether there is a Matheson.
But there could be.
Yeah, because he was the head of the English department.
Had you chosen him, that would have been a piece of cake, right?
That's right.
It would have been very easy.
I'm sorry, I interrupted you.
No, no, no.
Well, look what happened to Matheson, which is probably why there isn't a Matheson chair.
That's right.
But anyway, the long and short of it is that we talked, and we talked, and he suggested, said, Bob, you start your course out with Let Us Now Praise Famous Men.
a great admirer of James Agee, he went to Harvard.
He's a graduate of Harvard.
Actually, he and my father-in-law were in the same class at Harvard.
And he said, well, let's call it the James Agee professorship.
Then the issue came up of what?
I would not have a professorship of psychology or sociology or the social sciences.
He said, I'll never forget, like an Eric Erickson question.
He said, well, what are you?
What are you going to call yourself in this intellectual world?
I said, I looked down, I said, I like the way William James used to talk about social ethics.
He smiled.
He said, oh my God.
Another Harvard guy.
I said.
He was right up the street.
He said, Bob, I had a nice 19th century appeal to him.
I said, that's how it came about, James, social ethics.
When you think of... I mean, let me wander.
High grounds are no department.
Which must have been unique in the university.
Well, sort of, yeah.
Wonderful, wonderful.
When you think of Let Us Now Praise Famous Men, this was a book that really had no audience when it was written.
No audience.
I mean, it was banned.
I mean, it wasn't banned, but published loose, said no way.
I mean, I have a first of that, by the way, first edition of that.
Oh, boy, 1939.
The first, yeah, the one with that kind of red.
I have everything by A.G., by the way.
I should have brought them here.
You know, one of my sons has A.G.s.
I saw that, yeah.
You're telling me good work.
When you think I'm bringing up A.G., it's not my mistake.
I have pictures of him in my study.
I think you probably remember it.
David, will it be possible to take a few pictures, by the way, of the study before we do that?
No, I'll check, yeah.
And do you mind if I shoot a couple pictures, by the way, as we speak?
Not at all.
Let me tell you something else about the Let Us Now Praise famous moonwalk.
always began with that book, and it drove the students a little crazy, of course, initially.
They didn't know what to do with him, with the writing, with the whole, with a lot of those jibes thrown, including the intellectual world, the whole chapter in education there.
But I couldn't have done it without him.
I couldn't have taught.
He was like a spiritual... It had to be a spiritual one, sir.
What?
I interrupt you.
A spiritual what?
the whole spiritual flow of the book.
It had to be that book by A.G.?
You don't think you could have done it with Death and the Family?
I could have, but there's something about that book that takes on documentary work and the whole predicament that we're in.
Those of us who are torn between our privilege and our moral responsibilities and
It's an extraordinary book.
I have to tell you, this is what I was going to tell you.
I got a package sent, brought to me by a Yale undergraduate in the 1960s.
It was from Walker Evans.
And in it were pictures of A.G.
that he'd taken.
And he sent me a note saying that he looked forward someday perhaps to meeting me, but he felt that I should have those pictures that he'd taken of age.
About a month later he died.
Walker Evans, photography as it is in the future.
Photography is a passion of mine, and Walker
Evans is in the pantheon, as far as I'm concerned.
Well, there are those pictures.
When you teach Let Us Now Praise Famous Men, are the pictures, are the photographs?
Oh, I show them to the students.
So they're part of the text.
Oh, very much so.
Well, you know, double text.
Pictures and words.
Exactly.
So maybe you could give me a little riff on that, if you don't mind.
That whole conceptual thing.
Why it's so important for you to combine the images
Because that's what we are, the creature of words and images.
Remember, when we dream at night, pictures cross our minds.
When we wake up, we use words to convey what those pictures
as they were seen by us and enacted by us in our dreams, mean, and we tell a story, which is our report about what we dreamed.
So we are the creature who is constantly picturing things to ourselves at night and during the daytime when we have what are called daydreams.
Then we use language to narrate, to tell us, to talk about those pictures.
And in fact, Eric Erickson, who was an artist before he became a psychoanalyst and a writer, once said to me, he said, I will always say to my patients, what did you see last night?
And he said that would get everything going.
And I had those words in my mind when I thought of double take.
Double take.
Words.
Pictures.
And it's double capital T, too.
I mean, so you really do, you emphasize the two words.
That's right.
It's not one word.
It could be one word.
It's a double take.
And it's words, and I remember Eric saying that.
What did you see last night?
What did you see that you're trying to tell me about?
And I would do, I've done this with my patients.
I'm short to say, have you done the same thing?
I've done this with my patients.
I often say, well, last night, and I'll say, well, they'll say, well, I had a dream.
And I'll say to them, would you tell me what you saw?
And it doesn't happen.
I don't say in the dream.
I'll say, would you tell me what you saw?
And they immediately know to pick up on it.
And you mindfully do not use the word dream.
That's right.
But they immediately pick up because they have told me they had a dream.
And that's when I annotate what they said with a footmark.
So why do you avoid using the word dream?
I don't avoid it.
They bring it up.
Oh, I see.
And then another point, I would use it.
But what I'm trying to do is accentuate the visual side of the dreaming experience so that it doesn't get lost in a lot of talk.
Not the talk doesn't do justice to a dream, too.
The conveying through words.
what was seen and remembered.
But remember, dreaming is a visual experience.
So let us know... Not that there aren't words that take place in the dream, you know.
We talk in dreams, too.
I think we do.
I mean, who knows?
Who knows?
The neurobiologist will come up with some little segment of the brain, and they've got to tell you that this
This segment.
I've often wondered what language people who are fluent in many tongues, several tongues, you wonder what language they dream in.
That's right.
What language they think in.
Because I'm strictly all English, but my daughter is getting a graduate degree at that point in Tufts and French, and she says she can really think in French at some point, because she spent a year at the store.
What a gift that is, to be in your 20s.
and to be able to begin thinking in another language, I think it's a similar kind of a thing.
But it is seeing things, isn't it?
It is dreaming and seeing.
So when it's acting, it's talking, but it's seeing.
And it's primarily a, it's like a movie.
Dreaming is a movie with sound.
It's not a still.
It's not a still picture.
It's a moving picture.
And is it a story, do you think?
Is it narrative?
It is.
Dreams are stories told to us by ourselves, then remembered.
And if we are fortunate, if we work at it, and as Floyd told us, you have to work at it because you have to keep it in mind, so to speak.
Then you become the student.
You become your own student.
Do you do this yourself?
I do.
I have a dream in the morning.
I try to remember.
Sometimes even like a few words down, just make sure that I hold.
I got this from Eric.
And I got it from Anna Floyd, too.
She used to tell me.
She once said to me when I went down to see her in New Haven, when she was at the Yale Child Study Center, she said, well, she talked about Eric because she knew him.
He had been Eric.
an Alice Sand, to use a word.
He'd worked with her as a patient.
Then it was called an Alice Sand in Vienna.
But she once said to me, she said, you know, Eric's life as an artist helped him to interpret dreams because dreams have such a strong visual side to them that Eric could always appreciate it.
You wonder about someone like William Blake and, you know, his, what,
the dreams that the staff must have had.
He learns these languages strictly so he can illustrate Dante in the original language or he learns Hebrew so he can do the Bible and he learns
It's interesting, though, that Anna Freud did admit to me one of the only times I've ever heard her, she must have been critical of her father, but she said that this is an aspect of dreaming that her father didn't pay much attention to, which was an understatement.
He didn't, to my knowledge, pay really any attention to it.
He was so busy in analyzing, in a way, and then conveying in words what that analysis meant in dream analysis.
that he, I think, paid very little attention to the visuals.
So would let us now praise famous men be a powerful work without the pictures?
Or is this a synergistic kind of a work where one feeds out the other makes it?
I think A.G.
would say no.
I think he felt that those pictures are
absolutely an essential part of what that book is about.
So I wonder what it was that prompted Moose to say, no way.
Was it the pictures, or was it the text, or was it both?
I think both.
He said, no way.
It's the combination that I think Moose felt was social dynamite.
Really?
and, you know, the words are dynamite enough, and then you get those words in that context with that language, then they're taken away from the FSA tradition and connected, let's face it, to a kind of verbal dynamite.
But they help the verbal side become more dynamite-ridden.
The Gloria Club in the 1940s had an exhibition called The 100 Most Influential Books in America Prior to 1800.
And they included, you know, the Noah Webster Dictionary of the Language, the Sears Roebuck catalog, believe it or not, the Montgomery Ward.
It's a book, I guess.
It influenced people.
But that aside, the agey book, would you regard that as an influential book
That's not what happened to it initially.
It went out of print.
That's right.
But nevertheless, had it founded and not been... Actually, at what point does this book
I guess it's reprinted by Holton Mifflin in the 60s, right?
Yeah, it was definitely reprinted then because I used it.
That's right.
But prior to that, do you think it's one of these underground coal trains?
It was Holton Mifflin, I think, originally published in 39 or 40.
And then it was basically went out of print.
I think it just disappeared.
And then Angie died in 54, was it, early?
Yeah, maybe a little later than that.
I don't know when Death in the Family came out.
Yeah, 55, I think, just about then, on his way to the Cornell Medical Center.
But I think this all came after his death.
Warper Evans was alive.
But Angie...
Remember, God knew Jews during the Civil Rights era because I saw that book in Mississippi with college students.
And I thought, what justice that is, that let us now praise famous men has returned to the South and is being held to by civil rights young people standing up to the state of Mississippi segregationist government.
That's such an important book for this book that I'm writing.
I'm just thinking, I'm trying to find books that have really
had an impact.
It is important.
And when I think that you begin your course, this has pride of place.
This is the one that you start with.
I begin him with A.G.
and then with Orwell.
He's the second one.
Rode to Wigan Pier.
Then we move on to Dr. Williams, Tilly Olson, very important in her story.
I interviewed her in San Francisco a few years back.
Did you?
I took a picture of her that I let her use.
She liked it so much that she used it for her.
Oh, she's a sweetie.
I think she's still alive, isn't she?
She's still out there, yeah.
She moved out of her apartment and moved into September.
She must be in her mid-80s.
Yeah.
Now, there's a woman who's totally self-educated.
I know.
Her education is the public library.
The public library.
I've corresponded with her.
She's wonderful.
These are the heroes.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, I was dead before.
You know, I had such a brief...
You get Dr. Williams and Tilly Olsen and William Collins Williams.
And Walker Percy, who was also in my talk.
That's social dynamiting.
So Tilly Olsen, who else?
Well, Allison, Invisible Man.
So for your critics who say you concentrate almost exclusively on
White males.
No, it's well, Troy Olson.
You're proving them wrong here, that's what you're telling me.
I saw that in the Globe piece.
I said, what the heck is this guy talking about here?
A few years ago, there was a profile of you on the Globe.
Holly's profiles, whatever.
You have the reading list, I think.
I can get it.
It must be online.
I'm sure I can get it.
The reading list would include, of course... I don't have it.
...Invisible Man.
I didn't get it to you.
I didn't get zero and stuff.
Invisible Man is very important.
Oh, Zora Neale Hurston.
Very much part of that course.
Zora Neale Hurston.
What does she bring to the discourse?
Well, look, what she brings to the discourse is the South and a black
woman trying to find her dignity.
You know, this is quite a story.
And another rebellious, overlooked.
She had a rough time, as did Angie, as did Williams.
And Killie Olsen wasn't exactly celebrated for a long while.
Oh, Killie Olsen had a tough time.
I mean, she's been... And he arrested her in Kansas City, I think.
That's right.
I should show you what's coming out.
Well, you know the Bruce Springsteen book, don't you?
No, I don't.
You don't know that book I do in Bruce Springsteen?
Oh, I do.
I'm sorry.
It's obviously coming out.
Yes, of course.
It's going to be a paperback.
And who's publishing it?
Random House.
Oh, good.
I'll get it.
Actually, I think I have extra... This I think you'd be interested in.
So what a case... Oh, yeah.
Oh, this is good.
Excellent.
Let me see if the guy is still in my study.
Okay.
Let me just a second.
Good.
Thanks.
Fine.
Tell me why... By the way, I saw a review you wrote in the Los Angeles Times.
It's about a novel.
They ask me, you know, why not?
I've done about four pieces for them this year.
And I've done a couple of op-ed pieces as well.
It's a good... Five Pulitzer Prizes they won last year.
Four more than the New York Times.
No, it's very well done.
Yeah, I'm very happy to be writing for them.
Yeah, I was reading, I said, I know.
That's great.
Thank you.
So, why Springfield?
Can I call you Nick?
I would be honored.
Yes, please.
Why Springfield?
You know, you'll see the answer to that.
That's a very good question.
You'll see there mention of Donathia Lang, who also came from New Jersey.
You'll see that, and the William Collins story.
You'll see the whole story that we're talking about.
Makes sense to me right now, of course.
And how I connect him to William.
Sure, Mr. New Jersey, yeah.
Also, I should tell you, it's because of Walker Percy.
That's the story.
Walker before he dies.
He was dying, and I was saying goodbye, but he said, Bob, you ought to pay attention to this Bruce Springsteen fella.
Really?
And I said, who is he?
I mean it.
I said that.
He said, you should pay attention to him.
I said, Walker, I think I know the name, but I... He said, listen to those songs.
And then it was very interesting the way he put it to me.
He said, see if you can get the words and read them.
He knew that I wasn't going to, you know, I'm not on music.
I go to the symphony, right to the symphony, or to listen to the Beethoven of Brahms.
He knew it was a generational thing and a lot of other things.
I wanted to show him what it is.
I went and bought my sons.
My God, what's happening to them?
I said, who's this fool's friend?
I said, Dad!
[Mumbling.]
I was interested in Flannery O'Connor.
He mentions Flannery O'Connor.
[Mumbling.]
And then you talk about a wicker-pushy rotation, when he came into that lecture hall.
They all recognized him right there.